is it time for a fresh start has your
Instagram just been full of so many
headaches recently are you considering a
Rebrand maybe launching a new product a
new podcast or just starting over well
if so you're in the right place because
today I'm going to be talking to you
about how to start over on Instagram and
whether or not it's a good idea for you
to start a new account and right away
I'm going to tell you what you don't
want to hear which is that the majority
of people who I speak to I end up
recommending that they don't start a new
account one of the biggest plagues on
social media whether it's Instagram Tik
Tok YouTube or whatever one of the
biggest reasons that people fail and
they don't achieve the amount of
followers or views or sales that they're
looking for is that they're giving up
too soon there's this classic famous and
it's honestly kind of cliche image of
these two miners digging underground and
the one who is just one more strike of
his axe of his hammer away from finding
the diamonds he's the one who gives up
and turns around and walks away and
often times that's true on Instagram as
well you never know when you're just one
post away from blowing up going viral
and having tons of new followers you
never know when the pendulum is about to
swing in the other direction and
suddenly you're going to start growing
your following again and so before we
even get into the reasons why you might
want to start a new account and some
questions that I would recommend asking
yourself to decide if starting over is
right for you I think it's important
that we all be real with ourselves that
we all look ourselves in the mirror and
ask you know have I really done
everything have I really exhausted all
of my options and is this something that
that I'm committing to you know if you
are going to start over it's not going
to be smooth sailing it's going to be
really tough to grow it's not going to
be instant rainbows and Sunshine and
Lollipops you're going to face a lot of
the same challenges that you are with
this current account if you're currently
struggling with things like coming up
with ideas or staying consistent or
finding motivation well then that's not
going to necessarily change just because
you start a new account so take a hard
look in the mirror and decide if this is
something that you're really ready to
commit to with that being said why might
someone want to start a new account in
the first place well number one often
times newer accounts grow faster and on
Instagram there's even a new little
badge that Instagram will add right
below your profile picture that says the
word new to show anyone who's clicking
on your profile that this is a new
account and that has been shown to
slightly increase people's likelihood of
pressing the follow button also new
accounts often grow faster because they
have fewer followers and I know that
sounds confusing but really it's not
just that they have fewer followers it's
that they have fewer followers but a
higher engagement rate let's say you
start a brand new account and your first
10 followers are all of your very best
closest friends well those 10 followers
are likely going to be very engaged with
your posts so let's say you start a new
account you have 10 new followers who
are all your best friends and then you
share a new reel well that reel is
likely going to get 10 views and 10
likes and maybe even 10 comments and
from the algorithms perspective that's
crazy because 100% of your followers
viewed and liked and engaged with your
post for someone like my myself who has
over 600,000 followers on Instagram
that's basically impossible and so
because you have such a high engagement
rate the algorithm will think that your
account is a great account and that that
post is a great post and thus the
algorithm will be more likely to show
your content to more people you also
might want to start a new account just
you know for a fresh start maybe you
want some new followers maybe you want
to change your Niche or your topic maybe
you just want to kind of Rebrand and
reinvent yourself online another common
reason that people start new accounts is
to avoid glit bches avoid spam avoid
trolls or even avoid security issues if
you have for example had an Instagram
account for about a decade you most
likely have a couple hundred if not a
couple thousand spam followers you might
even have a couple hundred if not a
couple thousand real followers but those
real followers don't really use
Instagram or they don't use that account
or they've lost the login and password
for that account and so they they still
follow you but they're not really active
anymore similarly if you've had an
account for 10 years you've likely
logged in on some kind of sketchy
websites or downloaded some apps back in
2014 and put your login information in
and basically there's just a lot more
places for vulnerability in your account
security that can kind of be aass over
time so if you haven't had success with
this account and you're worried about
security issues you might want to start
a new one similarly new accounts can
often get access to new features now
this isn't a foolproof method but if you
have one of those Instagram accounts
that you still don't have the new
features and it's like 3 years after
they've been rolled out like like you
still don't even have 30 second reels
you still don't even have like the
collaboration feature or the notes
feature in the direct messages even
though that should be available for your
account type and for the country that
you live in well then you might want to
consider starting a new account and of
course like I said this isn't a
guaranteed way to get access to new
features because new features are
somewhat random in who gets access to
them it doesn't matter if you have a lot
of followers or very few it doesn't
matter necessarily what kind of phone
you're on or how old or new your account
is but every little thing that you do
might slightly improve your odds so
starting a new account is something that
many people have done to just experiment
and see if that does get them access to
new features and speaking of experiment
that's of course another really common
reason that you might want to start a
new account is maybe you want to
experiment with a new industry maybe you
want to just test out what it's like of
course something that I should say right
now while we're still near the beginning
of this podcast is that just because you
start a new account doesn't mean you
necessarily have to abandon or delete
your old account you could keep both
active and I know many people who have a
main account that they've had for you
know a decade or more but they start a
new account and they just kind of
experiment maybe they post more offbrand
things on that page maybe they post
content that they're not quite sure how
it would be received by their existing
followers on their already built and
established page some people just have a
backup account in case their main
account gets hacked or gets taken down
or gets flagged or banned and some
people who have a massive following
create a backup account just so that
they can can have extra followers on a
second profile so there's a wide variety
of reasons why you might want to start a
new account on Instagram but most likely
you clicked on this episode today
because you're trying to figure out
should you you're trying to get someone
to give you the definitive yes or no
answer should you start a new account
and of course I can't without having a
one-on-one conversation with you tell
you yes or no whether or not you should
but I have devised a list of questions
that you can ask yourself and these are
the questions that I would likely be
asking you if we were to be having this
one-on-one conversation so you can ask
yourself the following questions and
based off of your responses I'll be able
to nudge you in one direction or the
other and the first question to ask
yourself is how long have you had the
account the longer you've had the
account the worse off it might be or I
should say the longer you've had the
account the more likely it is that I'm
going to recommend you start a new one
if you've had an account for 13 years
and you're still below a thousand
followers and your engagement is
terrible and you just can't grow well
then it might be time to start a new one
but if you just started a new account
let's say a year ago or two years ago or
even a couple months ago well then you
still have a new account you don't have
an old account to start over let's keep
focusing on this one that you just
started question number two and this
might be maybe the most important
question to ask yourself have you been
consistent for six months straight as a
minimum I used to say have you been
consistent for at least 90 days but now
with people I think it's important to be
even more critical and more realistic
and that is to ask yourself have I been
posting consistently and of course
there's different definitions of
consistency but for argument sake and
for the sake of this podcast let's say
about five posts a week five feed posts
per week and that includes reals have
you been posting at least five feed
posts per week for the last 6 months if
not then I don't think you've had a long
enough track record of consistency I
don't think you've been practicing
enough I don't think you've been showing
up regularly enough to fairly judge your
account if you're someone who posts a
couple times a week and then you miss a
couple weeks and then you post really
consistently for a month and then you're
kind of inconsistent for a month well
then it's not fair to judge your account
it wouldn't be fair to judge an athlete
who doesn't show up to practice every
day and that's what posting is on
Instagram it's practice it's an
opportunity to get better to reach new
people and to grow your following and so
if you're not consistently posting well
then stop watching the video right now
because you got to get consistent before
you're able to judge your account and
whether or not it's healthy enough to
keep going or to just restart and that
of course is really a focus just on
quantity but quality matters too so
question number three is is your content
quality and this is one that of course
is a little bit more subjective right I
can't necessarily just give you a list
of criteria to make sure that your posts
are quality but when you look at
everyone else in your Niche when you
look at other people in your industry or
maybe even when you look at the top dogs
the best accounts in your field is your
cont content very similar to theirs at
least in terms of quality is it well lit
do you have good audio how's your
editing how's your pacing what kinds of
posts are you sharing are you only
sharing trending audio lipsync reels or
are you sharing Dynamic direct to camera
content kind of like this are you
posting valuable sharew worthy
educational captivating content or are
you kind of just posting whatever you
can think of and this is another one
where you really need to take a harsh
look in the mirror if your content is
not quality it doesn't matter if you
have a new account or an account that's
80 years old you're going to struggle to
grow if you've had this account for a
long time and you've been consistent for
a long time and that consistency has
been high quality you've been making
great content and sharing it on a daily
basis for years now and you're really
struggling to grow like maybe the growth
is negative or the engagement is just
super low it's non-existent it's not
there well then you might want to
consider starting a new account but if
you haven't had the account for long if
you haven't been consistent for long and
if the content hasn't been high quality
then I would not recommend starting a
new account all right question number
four to ask yourself is have you ever
used an inorganic growth strategy these
inorganic growth strategies we covered
them in another YouTube video but they
might include buying engagement maybe
paying for a shout out buying followers
joining engagement groups doing follow
unfollow doing giveaways of cash prizes
in order for people to follow you or
anything else that's in organic
basically any strategy that you are
basically paying for followers or even
hiring one of those growth agencies that
promises a th000 likes on every post and
10,000 new followers a month guaranteed
anything like that would be an inorganic
growth strategy and if you have used
those I might consider starting a new
account and the more you have used let's
say you bought 50,000 followers and you
buy engagement on every single one of
your posts then you might really want to
start over and an analogy for why you
might want to start over if this
question kind of pertains to you is
think about like we're raising a chicken
right we're raising a chicken that we're
planning on eating if that chicken from
the start has a healthy diet it has a
healthy environment it's a freerange
chicken and it's a living a very happy
life and it it's free of predators and
it's being raised on this very loving
Farm by this great family well then it's
a healthy chicken and it probably
doesn't need to start start over so to
speak but if this chicken from day one
has been pumped full of steroids and
growth hormones and all these added
inorganic chemicals well then sure from
the outside it might look like this
really big meaty chicken but at the end
of the day it's not a real healthy
chicken right it's not a chicken that
you necessarily want to eat and so that
might be a chicken that might be a case
where we might want to start over with
that one and not only are these
inorganic growth strategies really
ineffective in the long run when it
comes to selling or building an engaged
Community they also often times violate
Instagram's terms and services policies
and so question number five is have you
whether intentionally or unintentionally
whether you actually did it or not has
Instagram ever told you that you have
violated their Community guidelines
again I'm not asking you whether or not
you actually did it I'm not asking you
whether or not you meant to do it all
that matters is that Instagram thinks
you did and basically the more
violations you have the more times your
account has been suspended or that
you've lost access to a feature or that
you've been locked out from doing
something for 24 hours or for a week or
for 30 days the more times those sorts
of penalties have been acred by your
account the more likely you would be to
want to restart your account and I can
give you a personal story of when this
has happened to me recently I had a post
on my Instagram that was shared with a
direct message automation keyword and
not to get too deep into the strategy
basically what was going on here was I
was asking my followers to comment a
specific keyword and then once they
commented that keyword they would
receive an automatic direct message from
me and from my account it's a great way
to increase engagement and increase
sales and it's done using many chat
which is an official partner of
Instagram they're officially partnered
officially linked and it's totally fine
and okay to use many chat to send
automated messages but here's the
mistake I made when I made the post I
forgot to turn on the automation so I
had it set up but I forgot to just flip
the on switch on so then after about 5
or 10 minutes I realized that everyone
who was commenting that keyword was not
receiving that automatic direct message
so I quickly thought oh I know what I'll
do I'll just type out a message that I
would be sending to them anyways I just
copied the automated message and I'll
just manually copy and paste and send it
to everyone who missed it when I forgot
to turn on the automation but that got
me flagged basically I was copying and
pasting the exact same message to like
50 people in a very short window of time
and Instagram was like whoa this looks
like spammy in authentic Behavior and so
Instagram locked me out of my direct
messages for seven days now do I think
this was right no do I think that if I
could have a conversation with someone
at Instagram they would totally
understand that it's not spammy it's not
inauthentic these people literally asked
for the message that I was sending to
them and then they would lift the band
sure but none of that matters all that
matters is the Instagram algorithms the
computers that check Instagram for spam
and inauthentic Behavior they flagged me
and so because of that I was locked out
of my direct messag for 7 days and so
that's kind of like strike number one
against my account and if I continued to
use spammy Behavior or do these sort of
inauthentic things that you know the
algorithm viewed as spammy or
inauthentic and I continued to get more
strikes against my account well then
that might be an added reason that I
might want to start over on my Instagram
and don't worry I'm not starting over
anytime soon but I just wanted to you
know explain to you that it happens to
everyone it happens no matter who you
are no matter how good your intentions
are you might get get flagged by
Instagram and the more times you're
flagged the tougher it is to grow
because from Instagram's point of view
they don't want to highlight and promote
accounts that flat out violate their
guidelines you can actually go into your
Instagram settings and figure out
whether or not your account is
recommendable and whether or not
Instagram will show you to more people
basically check if you're actually being
shadowbanned or not all you have to do
is go to your Instagram profile page tap
on the hamburger icon in the upper right
hand corner then tap settings then
scroll all the way down to the bottom
and you're going to see a little tiny
button that says account status when you
tap on that it will show you the three
different kinds of recommendations or
the three different ways that your
account could be suspended and you just
want to see a green check you want to
see a green check next to removed
content that will ensure that you have
had no recently removed content that was
inv violation of community guidelines
you want to see a check next to what
can't be recommended because that that
you have not posted anything that cannot
be recommended or if I were to say that
without the double negative everything
you've posted can be recommended and
then the final check is features that
you can't use you want to see a check
mark next to that to ensure that you can
use all of those features if you do see
an X next to any of these three
categories you can actually tap right on
it Instagram will tell you what you've
done wrong it will show you the post
that you've made they will tell you how
they think you violated their guidelines
and you even have an option to appeal if
you need to but again the more strikes
you have against your account and the
more frequently that you are not being
recommended or don't have access to
certain features the more you might want
to start a new account and Hey listen
when you do start that new account stop
doing whatever Instagram is flagging you
for I know like let's remove politics
from this conversation let's remove you
know opinions from this conversation if
Instagram says that you can't do
something on their platform and you
continue to do it at the end of the day
like you're on their platform and I know
it sucks and I know you know you might
disagree but you're on their platform
and when you sign up you agree to abide
by their Community guidelines if you
violate those guidelines unfortunately
you're not playing by their rules and
they're not going to let you keep
playing the game that was question
number five question number six is is
your engagement critically low and maybe
even worse than that has your engagement
rate dropped off significantly recently
and let me Define for you exactly what I
mean by critically low if you have 5,000
followers or less and your engagement
rate is below 2% I would consider that
critically low you might be shocked and
surprised to learn that the average
engagement rate for an Instagram account
with 5,000 followers or less is only
4.8% that's 240 pieces of Engagement so
if you have 5,000 followers or less on
Instagram you can realistically expect
about 240 pieces of engagement on each
post what do I mean by pieces of
Engagement I mean add up your total
number of likes saves shares and
comments those four kinds of Engagement
add up those four and they should add up
to roughly 240 for each post of course
you'll have some posts that are more
some posts that are less but if you have
about 5,000 followers on Instagram
that's what you can realistically expect
in order to find out what your realistic
engagement rate should be if you have
less than 5,000 followers is to
basically just take the number of
followers that you have multiply that
times
0.0 48 because that would be 4.8% and
whatever number you get that would be
the total amount of Engagement that each
post receives so if you have a th000
followers multiply that times 4.8% you
would get 48 so if you have a th000
followers you can expect a total of 48
likes comments shares Andor saves and of
course that's just the average so it's
okay if you're a little bit below it if
you're a little bit above it but I would
recommend considering starting over if
it's critically low so if it's less less
than half which would be less than 2% if
you have below a 2% engagement rate and
Below 5,000 followers you might want to
consider starting a new account put that
into real world numbers what does that
look like if you have a th followers and
you're getting less than 20 total likes
comments saves and shares then that's
critically low if you have between 5,000
and 20,000 followers the numbers
actually go down a little bit the
average engagement rate for someone with
between 5 and 20,000 followers is
1.7% so let's cut that in half if you
have below
85% in terms of your engagement rate
then I would consider that critically
low if you have between 20,000 and
100,000 followers on Instagram the
average engagement rate for an account
of your size is roughly
1.2% so if you have less than 6% as your
engagement rate I would consider that
critically low and if you have more than
100,000 followers that number continues
to go down the averaging engagement rate
for accounts with more than 100,000
followers is only about 1% and so if you
have less than half a percent as your
engagement rate and you have more than
100,000 followers that's critically low
and you might want to consider starting
over the seventh question that you need
to ask yourself and this one might
surprise some people is have you ever
had a post that went viral outside of
your Niche and not to get too far ahead
of myself but this is why I always
recommend posting reels that are within
your Niche that are related to your
content and related to whatever it is
that you have to sell or your community
or whatever it may be because here's the
issue let's go with this hypothetical
story let's say that your Niche is
beginner rock climbing tips for women in
their 50s you're teaching women in their
50s who have never Rock climbed before
in their life you're giving them very
beginner tips and strategies and maybe
down the line you're going to sell a
course or one-on-one coaching or
something like that and you yourself are
a woman in your 50s and you're a new
grandma and your daughter just had her
first baby and you're super excited and
see you post this really cute little
reel of your grandbaby and it goes viral
and it blows up because it's super cute
or maybe it's super funny and now all of
the sudden you have thousands maybe even
tens of thousands of new followers who
follow you for the wrong reasons they
follow you for more cute baby content or
they follow you for more funny toddler
content or they follow you for whatever
reason but it's a reason that doesn't
necessarily directly translate or apply
to your Niche well what's that going to
look like in the long run they're going
to most likely become very unengaged as
they continue to see content about rock
climbing which is not why they followed
you in the first place so they're going
to either become unengaged or they're
going to unfollow and worst case
scenario they stay somewhat engaged they
stay following you but they're never
going to become customers because they
don't actually care about rock climbing
they don't actually care about what it
is you have to sell they don't care
about those tips they just want you to
post more videos of your grandbaby a
personal experience of when this
happened to me was over on Tik Tok and
some of you may know this story but I
blew up on Tik Tok in the early days of
Tik Tok like the very beginning of 2019
January 2019 I blew up like 200 300,000
followers on Tik Tok like that like
within a week but I blew up because I
was posting funny trending dancing
videos with my other college football
teammates in the locker room but as you
know that's not what I do for a living
yes that was a season of my life but I
can't continue to make that content and
also I can't monetize that content right
what I do for a living now how I
actually make money how I actually put a
roof over my head and put food on the
table is not swinging my hips from side
to side in the locker room with my
shoulder pads on that was a fun period
of my life but because I gained so many
followers from that kind of content now
the vast majority of those people the
vast majority of those 200 300,000
people they don't care about growing on
Instagram they don't care about building
a business online they don't care about
side hustles and and building uh wealth
through your social media post they
don't care about that they just want to
see me dance and so some of you may know
this some of you may have even watched
the entire YouTube video that I did
chronicling this but my engagement on
Tik Tok was critically low and so I
basically went through this checklist I
went through all these questions for
myself on Tik Tok how long have I had
the account four years which on Tik Tok
is a long time how long have I be been
consistent I was consistent on Tik Tok
for about a year or two posting content
related to this Niche that is very
similar to like what you see on build
your tribe and on my Instagram so very
consistent content how's it been quality
yeah it's been the same highquality
content that I've been posting on
Instagram I've been posting a lot of the
same high quality stuff on Tik Tok so I
knew it was quality have I used any
inorganic growth strategies no I have
not I never bought followers I never
bought engagement have I violated any of
Tik tok's Community guidelines no I
haven't but was my engagement rate
critically low yes it was so terribly
low I had 300,000 followers and yet I
was averaging about six likes per Tik
Tok video and that was because the
answer to question number seven was yes
I went viral outside of my Niche and so
ultimately that's why I decided to start
over on Tik Tok and since starting over
I've been getting way more engagement
and way more of a sense of community and
the growth has been much better now do I
have 300,000 followers on Tik Tok
anymore no but the actual return on
investment seems to be way more worth my
time so again if you have made a post
that has gone viral and it's outside of
your Niche especially if it's gone Mega
viral or it's gained a lot of followers
for you uh that might be something to
make you consider starting over and then
speaking of Niche last but certainly not
least question number eight to ask
yourself are you rebranding are you
drastically changing your Niche are you
creating a new offer a new course a new
book something new to sell that is
totally unrelated to what it is that you
were talking about posting about or
selling before if so again you might
really want to consider starting a new
account rather than just pivoting your
existing account let's say you were a
real estate agent in Southeastern Idaho
and that's what your whole Instagram
account was about it was about real
estate tips and tricks and you were
helping people buy and sell their homes
in Southeastern Idaho and now you are
rebranding to help people with
commercial real estate investments in
Southeastern Idaho well that's kind of
similar right there's a lot of crossover
there a lot of the people who were
interested in your first Niche will be
interested in your new Niche and so you
would probably not want to start a new
account you're probably fine to Pivot
and just keep going with your existing
account but if you're someone who is
transitioning from beginner rock
climbing tips to cake baking or you're
someone who is transitioning from dance
choreography to Excel spreadsheets well
then there's likely going to be very few
people who are interested in both niches
and so it would probably be most
beneficial for you to just start a new
account a clean slate get all of your
followers and who are engaged and then
start growing from there now speaking of
growing from there what do you do now
you've decided to start a new account
you have answered these questions and
you're like you know Brock my engagement
super low I've been consistent my
content has been quality I've had the
account for a really long time I've
never done anything in organic but it's
just crickets on my Instagram account
it's been such a tough time I've putting
in so much work but nothing seems to be
working so it's time to start fresh
first of all let me give you a word of
advice with which is it's going to take
some time I'm proud of you and I know
it's scary to start over so when you do
RIP that Band-Aid off you know take the
leap it's always scary when you're
leaving the nest and so I'm proud of you
for making this decision it is a bold
decision it will take some time it will
be challenging it will not be smooth
sailing but I do think that you know if
you went through all the questions and
you looked yourself in the mirror today
and you really listened to this podcast
and took it to heart um well then I
think that that decision you can trust
it and moving forward it's not going to
be easy like I said but it is the right
decision the easy decision is not always
the right decision and the right
decision is not always the easy thing to
do so I want to applaud you I want to
say I'm proud of you and if you need the
tips let's say you finished today's
episode and you're like yep I'm starting
over I'm starting fresh I'm starting
from zero what do I do now we've
actually already done an episode about
kind of the the tips that I would
recommend doing because it's not as
simple as just starting a new account
picking a new username and just hopping
right back into posting there's actually
some strategies that you will want to
follow to make sure that this new
account is really set up for a success
and that it can really get the Kickstart
the little boost that it needs right at
the beginning to get that snowball
rolling down the hill so we'll link that
up down in the show notes and I'm sure
we'll put the card up here somewhere so
you can click on that and listen to that
episode as well if you enjoyed today's
podcast please don't forget to subscribe
thank you so much for watching really I
appreciate you and let me know down in
the comments that's my biggest question
for you let me know are you going to be
starting over are you considering it are
you still on the fence if you have any
questions you know some specific
circumstance that you would love to ask
to either myself or the community go
ahead and put that down in the comments
and we can all kind of see if we can all
add our two cents about whether or not
you should start over but again thank
you so much for listening today and as
always happy networking